Testing E3SM Diagnostics
==============================================

Unit and integration tests
--------------------------

The repository now has two integration-test layers:

- Targeted image-regression tests for GitHub Actions CI/CD and local reproduction.
- Broad downloaded-data integration tests for broader smoke coverage.

Run all automated tests locally by doing the following:

    .. code::

        pip install . # Install your changes
        ./tests/test.sh # Run all unit and integration tests

To reproduce the primary CI pixel-regression gate locally, run:

    .. code::

        pytest tests/integration/test_plot_image_regressions.py -m image_regression

This target does not require ``zppy`` or LCRC data. It renders small,
repo-local plot fixtures and compares the generated PNGs against committed
baselines in ``tests/integration/baselines/``.

Each targeted baseline directory also includes
``baseline_metadata.json`` describing the environment used to generate the
committed images. Runtime metadata for the current test run is written beside
any diff artifacts as ``runtime_metadata.json``.


If these tests pass, you're done. If they fail unexpectedly however,
your code might have changed what the output looks like.

``ls tests/integration/image_check_failures``
will show you all the images that differ from expected.

If you see unexpected images listed, you'll have to investigate why your
code changed what the images look like.

If the only images listed are ones you expected to see changed,
then you need to update the expected images.


    .. code::

        cd /lcrc/group/e3sm/public_html/e3sm_diags_test_data/integration/expected
        cat README.md
        # This will show you the version, date, and hash of the current expected images.
        # Using that information do the following:
        mv integration_test_images previous_output/integration_test_images_<version>_<date>_<hash>
        # `cd` back into your E3SM Diags directory.
        # Your output will now become the new expectation.
        mv all_sets_results /lcrc/group/e3sm/public_html/e3sm_diags_test_data/integration/expected/integration_test_images
        cd /lcrc/group/e3sm/public_html/e3sm_diags_test_data/integration/expected

Run ``./tests/test.sh`` again. Now, the test should pass.

After merging your pull request, edit ``README.md``.
The version should be the version of E3SM Diags you ran ``./tests/test.sh`` with,
the date should be the date you ran ``./tests/test.sh`` on,
and the hash should be for the top commit shown by ``git log`` or on
https://github.com/E3SM-Project/e3sm_diags/commits/main.


Automated tests
---------------

We have a :ref:`GitHub Actions <ci-cd>` Continuous Integration / Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) workflow.

GitHub Actions runs unit tests plus the targeted image-regression suite as the
primary visual regression gate. The larger downloaded-data integration tests are
still run automatically, but with pixel checks disabled so they remain a broader
smoke test instead of the main image-regression signal.

GitHub Actions also runs a separate compatibility job that dynamically builds a
temporary environment from ``conda-forge/e3sm-unified-feedstock`` ``main`` by
parsing ``recipe/recipe.yaml``. That job uses caching for downloaded conda
packages and runs the same curated image-regression suite as an early-warning
check for upcoming E3SM-Unified dependency drift. Because feedstock ``main`` is
intentionally a moving target, this compatibility job is informational rather
than the primary required regression gate.

When updating targeted baselines, regenerate the expected PNGs in
``tests/integration/baselines/`` and refresh the adjacent
``baseline_metadata.json`` file with the resolved versions of Python,
``e3sm_diags``, E3SM Unified when relevant, ``xarray``, ``xcdat``, ``numpy``,
``pandas``, ``matplotlib``, ``cartopy``, ``xesmf``, ``ESMF``/``esmpy``, and
``xgcm``.

Complete run test
-----------------

``tests/integration/complete_run.py`` checks the images generated by all diagnostics to
see if any differ from expected.
This test is not run as part of the unit test suite, because it relies on a large
quantity of data found on LCRC (Anvil/Chrysalis).

    .. warning::
        You have to run this test manually. It is not run as part of the CI/CD workflow.

If you've been developing code on a different machine, you can get the code on a LCRC
machine by doing the following. First, push your code to GitHub.
Then log into a LCRC machine and run:

    .. code::

        git fetch <fork-name> <branch-name> # Fetch the branch you just pushed
        git checkout -b run-lcrc-test <repo-name>/<branch-name>

Now that you have your changes on LCRC, enter your development environment. Then:

    .. code::

        pip install . # Install your changes
        pytest tests/integration/complete_run.py

If this test passes, you're done. If it fails however, that means
your code has changed what the output looks like.

``ls image_check_failures`` will show your all the images that differ from expected.

If you see unexpected images listed, you'll have to investigate why your
code changed what the images look like.

If the only images listed are ones you expected to see changed,
then you need to update the expected images.


    .. code::

        cd /lcrc/group/e3sm/public_html/e3sm_diags_test_data/unit_test_complete_run/expected
        cat README.md
        # This will show you the version, date, and hash of the current expected images.
        # Using that information do the following:
        mv all_sets previous_output/all_sets_<version>_<date>_<hash>
        mv image_list_all_sets.txt previous_output/image_list_all_sets_<version>_<date>_<hash>.txt
        # `cd` back into your E3SM Diags directory.
        # Your output will now become the new expectation.
        mv <version>_all_sets/ /lcrc/group/e3sm/public_html/e3sm_diags_test_data/unit_test_complete_run/expected/all_sets
        cd /lcrc/group/e3sm/public_html/e3sm_diags_test_data/unit_test_complete_run/expected/all_sets
        # This file will list all the expected images.
        find . -type f -name '*.png' > ../image_list_all_sets.txt
        cd ..

Run ``pytest tests/integration/complete_run.py`` again. Now, the test should pass.

After merging your pull request, edit ``README.md``.
The version should be the version of E3SM Diags you ran
``pytest tests/integration/complete_run.py`` with,
the date should be the date you ran ``pytest tests/integration/complete_run.py`` on,
and the hash should be for the top commit shown by ``git log`` or on
https://github.com/E3SM-Project/e3sm_diags/commits/main.
